Before the 1990s, it was thought that antibodies were the only IgSF members capable of recognizing glycans. The first direct evidence for nonantibody IgSF glycan-binding proteins came from independent studies on sialoadhesin (Sn), a sialic acid (Sia)–dependent binding receptor on mouse macrophage subsets, and on CD22, a molecule previously cloned as a B-cell marker. Various techniques showed that Sn functions as a lectin, including loss of binding following sialidase treatment of ligands, inhibition assays with sialylated compounds, and Sia-dependent binding of the purified receptor to glycoproteins and to red blood cells derivatized to carry Sias in different linkages. With recombinant CD22, abrogation of cell adhesive interactions by sialidase treatment led to the discovery that it was a Sia-binding lectin, with a high degree of specificity for α2-6-linked Sias. Cloning of Sn then showed that it was an IgSF member sharing homology with CD22 and with two other previously cloned proteins, CD33 and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG). Demonstration of Sia recognition by CD33 and MAG resulted in the definition of a new family of Sia-binding molecules, which were initially called “sialoadhesins.” Meanwhile, preliminary evidence for glycan binding by additional IgSF members emerged, and a suggestion was made to classify all these molecules as “I-type” lectins. However, it became clear that these four Sia-binding molecules were a distinct subgroup sharing both sequence homology and Ig-domain organization, and that they were not all involved in adhesion. The term Siglec (sialic acid–binding immunoglobulin-like lectin) was therefore proposed in 1998. Subsequently, most of the CD33-related Siglecs (CD33rSiglecs) were discovered as a result of genomic and transcriptomic sequencing projects, which allowed in silico identification of novel Siglec-related genes and cDNAs.
The composition (monosaccharide units), degree of polymerization (DP), and branching of the oligosaccharins determine their biological activity in triggering plant defense. For example, oligogalacturonides that are biologically active typically require a DP of 10–14 for activity, whereas DPs of >7 and >4 are necessary for the oligochitosans and oligochitins, respectively.
Glycosyltransferases assemble monosaccharides into linear and branched glycan chains
Glycosidases remove monosaccharides from glycan structures
Many glycosyltransferases act on simple nucleotide sugar donor substrates, such as UDP-Gal, while for other glycosyltransferases, a lipid moiety such as dolichol-phosphate is the target.
Glycosyltransferases can transfer monosaccharides to other monosaccharides, proteins, lipids, and other moieties.
Glycosyltransferases act sequentially with the product of one enzyme's activity providing the acceptor substrate for the next.
The human blood group B alpha1-3 galactosyltransferase only acts on galactose modified by fucose in α1-2-linkage.
Fucosyltransferases attach fucose to glycan chains
Galactosyltransferases attach galactose to glycan chains
Glucosyltransferases attach glucose to glycan chains
Mannosyltransferases attach mannose to glycan chains
Sialyltransferases attach sialic acids to glycan chains
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases attach N-acetylglucosamine to glycan chains
The following enzymes are human glycosyltransferase genes: FUT1, FUT2, FUT3, FUT4, FUT5, FUT6, FUT7, FUT8, FUT9, FUT10, FUT11
The following enzymes are human galactosyltransferase genes: B3GALT1, B3GALT2, B3GALT5, COLGALT1, B4GALT7, B3GALT6, COLGALT2, A4GALT, A14GALT, A4GALT1, B3GALT9, B3GNT10
There is too little information available today to allow a comprehensive exposition of the evolution of even the major classes of glycans. However, based on available data, it is reasonable to suggest that selective pressures largely come from either intrinsic or extrinsic factors related to organism-specific functions of glycans and competitive host-pathogen interactions, respectively. Host glycans must evolve rapidly to compete with pathogens that have short generation times, high mutation rates, and horizontal gene transfer, yet glycans with a critical intrinsic role may incur deleterious effects if eliminated or mutated.
Beta-trefoil folds are a hallmark structural feature of R-type lectins that enable specificity in carbohydrate binding. These folds are observed in several protein families, including interleukin-1 and fibroblast growth factor, as key components in antigen-recognition and hormonal signalling cascades. Although beta-trefoil folds are a common subunit of R-type lectins, usually there are one or two subdomains responsible for recognizing and binding a carbohydrate ligand.
Many plant lectins such as ConA, WGA, or LCA (which lack an enzymatic or toxic A subunit) are toxic to animal cells via poorly understood mechanisms, whereas other lectins, such as soybean agglutinin (SBA) and peanut agglutinin (PNA), are not toxic to animal cells in culture. One mechanism of toxicity of plant lectins is the induction of apoptosis, perhaps by blocking receptor or transport functions in cells. Noncytotoxic lectins and antibodies to specific glycans can be rendered toxic by conjugating them with ricin A subunit or other toxic proteins.
Ancestral sialyltransferase families in invertebrates have been identified through sequence-based analysis showing orthology with the last common vertebrate ancestor. Increased diversity within vertebrate lineages is inferred to have resulted from divergent evolution, with a variety of gain-of-function and loss-of-function events identified in sialyltransferases throughout their evolutionary history.
The plant Golgi apparatus plays a critical role in cell wall biosynthesis, as it is the location for production of cell wall matrix polysaccharides, modification of protein glycosylation, and assembly/trafficking of cellulos synthase complexes.
Nearly all inherited disorders in glycan biosynthesis were discovered in the last 20 years. They are rare, biochemically and clinically heterogeneous, and usually affect multiple organ systems. CDGs (congenital disorders of glycosylation) are rare primarily because embryos with complete defects in a step of glycosylation do not usually survive to be born, documenting the critical biological roles of glycans in humans. CDG patients that survive are usually hypomorphic, retaining at least some activity of the pathways involved. Although rare, research on this group of genetically defined glycosylation disorders reveals important novel insights into the biology of the glycosylation process. Some defects strike only a single glycosylation pathway, whereas others impact several. Defects occur in (1) the activation, presentation, and transport of sugar precursors; (2) glycosidases and glycosyltransferases; and (3) proteins that traffic glycosylation machinery or maintain Golgi homeostasis.
Altered glycosylation is a universal feature of cancer cells, and certain glycans are well-known markers of tumor progression. Glycan changes in malignant cells take a variety of forms: loss of expression or excessive expression of certain glycans, increased expression of incomplete or truncated glycans, and, less commonly, the appearance of novel glycans. More specifically, studies have observed: altered branching and fucosylation of N-glycans, altered mucin expression and truncated O-glycans, altered sialic acid expression, increased selectin ligand expression, altered expression of blood groups, altered expression of glycosphingolipids, loss of GPI-anchor expression, along with several other changes in tumor cells. Most of these changes are caused by changes in transcription factor activity related to overall gene expression shifts in malignant cells.
N-glycans of the hybrid and complex type may exist with two or more GlcNAc-bearing branches that are referred to as antennae. In forming multi-antennary N-glycan structures, GlcNAc residues may be added to the trimannosyl core by six different GlcNAc transferases (I–VI). Up to five branches have been observed on N-glycans of some vertebrate glycoproteins.
Biantennary N-glycan structure with two terminal alpha-2,6-linked sialic acids is a common and optimal structure that is able to enhance the activities of antibodies against cancer, influenza, and inflammatory diseases.
Glycosylation can also enhance the stability of the protein therapeutic against proteolytic degradation, oxidation, precipitation, and denaturation. As glycosylation can shield hydrophobic regions on the glycoprotein’s surface, it can prevent protein aggregation, which can help decrease immunogenicity. Glycosylation can also hide immunogenetic protein epitopes on the glycoprotein’s surface. While glycosylation has many effects on glycoprotein drugs, it’s challenging to ensure that the final drug product has desired glycosylation patterns. The glycosylation patterns on a protein can be heterogeneous in terms of where the modification occurs and the modification itself.
Glycan microarrays consist of a panel of glycans immobilized on a microchip that can be used to evaluate binding specificity of glycan-binding proteins. This technology can be used in many specific services such as Glycoprotein Structure Analysis, Glycoprotein Quantification, High Throughput Glycan Screening Service, Tumor Glyco-diag Service, and Anti-Glycoprotein Antibody Development. 
Currently, structural determination of glycans is, at best, semi-manual and proceeds structure by structure. Since different glycan structures can result in the same mass, structural isomers are routinely separated via liquid chromatography (LC), followed by fragmentation into smaller substructures by MS, conceptually akin to shotgun sequencing. Current in-depth workflows are hard to parallelize, with a general trade-off between resolution and scale. All this has relegated structural glycomics to a few experts, inaccessible to most life science researchers. Nuances of diagnostic indicators are challenging for humans to decrypt manually or encode programmatically, especially at scale and while accommodating diverse experimental setups, as each linkage and monosaccharide can be affected by its sequence context.
In general, the biological activity and binding affinity of GAGs is dictated by their sulfation pattern, disaccharide unit sequence and 3D conformation; however, GAGs are also capable of unspecific binding of other positively charged proteins due to the negative charge provided by their numerous sulfate and carboxylic acid groups. Many proteins also contain specific evolutionarily conserved GAG-binding domains that mediate specific protein-GAG interactions. These domains often contain basic amino acids with small polar side chains (i.e. lysine and arginine), allowing flexibility and minimal steric hindrance for interaction with GAGs.
Glycosylation has been shown to ameliorate a multitude of pharmaceutically-relevant chemical and physical protein instabilities. Mechanistically, the different glycosylation parameters (e.g., number of glycans attached and glycan molecular size) studied so far can apparently impart different stabilization effects on the protein. While increasing the glycosylation degree apparently stabilizes the protein native state by increasing the internal non-covalent forces and rigidifying the protein structure, increasing the glycan molecular size appears to destabilize the protein unfolded state.
Glycan shielding is utilized by some enveloped viruses to evade immune system targeting by their host. These viruses typically adopt host gylcosylation during synthesis of the protein envelope, allowing antigens to be modified so that host antibodies are unable to recognize them, thereby preventing immune response to viral infection. As a result, some organisms develop antibodies that specifically target foreign glycoproteins in order to identify pathogens that may have adopted glycosylation patterns from another individual.
Hemoglobin is involved in oxygen transport and does not participate in glycan biosynthesis.
Glycan synthesis takes place primarily in the Golgi Apparatus and Endoplasmic Reticulum. The mitochondria and nucleus are principally involved in energy production and gene expression, respectively. 
Glycosidases remove carbohydrates from residues and do not perform glycosylation
Glycosylation is a post-translational modification that is not derived from genetic information. Thus, it is impossible to predict using current computational methods from DNA sequence data.
Plants and animals express very different repetoires of glycans, owing primarily to the preference of each for alpha and beta glycosidic linkages in their general metabolism.
