However, unlike the situation with dark matter in the Universe, there is already a lot known about glycans. The chemistry and metabolism of carbohydrates were prominent matters of interest in the first part of the 20th century. Although engendering much attention, they were primarily considered as a source of energy or as structural materials, apparently lacking other biological activities. Furthermore, during the molecular biology revolution of the 1970s, studies of glycans lagged far behind those of other major classes of molecules. This was in part because of their inherent structural complexity, the difficulty in determining their sequences, and the fact that their biosynthesis could not be directly predicted from a DNA template.
For example, glucuronic acid (GlcA) can be epimerized at C-5 to generate IdoA. Many more monosaccharides exist in glycoconjugates from other species and as intermediates in metabolism. We use a symbolic notation for the monosaccharides that are most abundant in vertebrate glycoconjugates (see Chapter 1). Common monosaccharides found in vertebrates. N-Acetylneuraminic acid is the most common form of sialic acid.  Monosaccharides exist in solution as an equilibrium mixture of acyclic and cyclic forms. The percentage of each form depends on the sugar structure. The cyclic form of a monosaccharide is characterized by a hemiacetal group formed by the reaction of one of the hydroxyl groups with the C-1 aldehyde or ketone. For reasons of chemical stability, five- and six-membered rings are most commonly formed from acyclic monosaccharides. Hexoses (six-carbon aldoses) and hexuloses (six-carbon ketoses) form six-membered rings via a C-1—O—C-5 ring closure; they form five-membered rings through a C-1—O—C-4 ring closure (Figure 2.5). A five-membered cyclic hemiacetal is labeled a “furanose” and a six-membered cyclic hemiacetal is called a “pyranose.” Pentoses can form both pyranose and furanose forms. Cyclization of acyclic D-glucose to form pyranose and furanose structures. The cyclization reaction produces both the α and β anomers (i.e., C-1 epimers).
Structural elements that dictate preferences for one form over the other, including the possible effects from the sulfated monosaccharide sequences around the IdoA/IdoA2S residue, are subject to further investigation. A second factor contributing to structural diversity and selective interactions with certain HS-binding proteins is the size of the sulfated saccharide domains. HS isolated from natural sources shows domain-like structures, with clusters of six to eight saccharides forming the highly sulfated domains known as S-domains. These regions are separated by nonsulfated saccharide residues, consisting of GlcA-GlcNAc RUs, known as NAc-domains. The S-domains contain primarily IdoA residues that likely contribute the flexibility needed to optimize binding to proteins and elicit desired biological activities.
Possible reasons include their relative hydrophilicity, flexibility, and mobility in aqueous environments and their extreme diversity, allowing facile short-term and long-term adaptations to changing environments and pathogen regimes. In bacteria, Archaea, and fungi, glycans serve critical structural roles in the cell wall and in resisting large differences in osmolarity between cytoplasm and environment. In eukaryotes, both secretory proteins and membrane proteins typically pass through an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–Golgi pathway, the cellular system in which many major glycosylation reactions occur (see below). Most proteins in the blood plasma of animals (with the exception of albumin) are also heavily glycosylated, and the glycosylation of these and other secreted proteins may provide solubility, hydrophilicity, and negative charge, thus reducing unwanted intermolecular interactions and protecting against proteolysis. Cell-surface membrane proteins like receptors, adhesion molecules, and channels are typically glycosylated, and this modification can promote their proper folding, ensure their stability, and impact function.
Glucose and fructose are the major carbon and energy sources for organisms as diverse as yeast and humans. Most organisms can synthesize the other monosaccharides needed for glycan biosynthesis from these sources. Not all of these biosynthetic pathways are equally active in all types of cells. However, there are some general principles. Monosaccharides must be activated to a high-energy donor for use in glycan synthesis. This process requires nucleoside triphosphates (typically UTP or GTP) and a glycosyl-1-P (monosaccharide with a phosphate at the anomeric carbon). They can be activated by a kinase (reaction 1) or generated from a previously synthesized activated nucleotide sugar (reactions 2 and 3)
In many cases, they catalyze a group-transfer reaction in which the monosaccharide moiety of a simple nucleotide sugar donor (electrophile) substrate (e.g., UDP-Gal, GDP-Fuc, or CMP-Sia; Chapter 5) is transferred to the acceptor (nucleophile) substrate. In some instances, the donor substrates contain a lipid moiety, such as dolichol-phosphate, linked to mannose or glucose. For other glycosyltransferases, the donor substrate is dolichol-pyrophosphate, linked to an oligosaccharide, and in these cases the entire oligosaccharide is transferred en bloc to the acceptor substrate (Chapter 9). Similarly, other lipid-linked sugars serve as donor substrates for bacterial glycosyltransferases involved in the assembly of peptidoglycan (e.g., GlcNAc-MurNAc(pentapeptide)-undecaprenyl pyrophosphate), lipopolysaccharide, and capsules (Chapters 21 and 22). Glycosyltransferases that use monosaccharides, oligosaccharides, proteins, lipids, small organic molecules, and DNA as acceptor substrates have been characterized (activity to RNA has also been suggested), but only glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthesis of glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycolipids are discussed in this chapter.
(1) structural contributions (e.g., extracellular scaffolds: cell walls and extracellular matrices, protein folding and function); (2) energy metabolism (e.g., carbohydrates as carbon sources for storage and manipulation of animal behavior: pollination and seed dispersal); and (3) information carriers (e.g., molecular patterns recognized by glycan binding proteins [GBPs])
The human and mouse glycomes have many glycan structures in common, but a few are unique or have divergent functional properties. For example, unlike humans, rodents synthesize cytidine monophospho-N-glycolylneuraminic acid (CMP-Neu5Gc), for the transfer of Neu5Gc to N- and O-glycans (Chapter 15). Similarly, the gene encoding α-1,3-galactosyltransferase (A3GALT2) is functional in the mouse but not in human (Chapter 20). The human and fly genomes include orthologous genes encoding GTs that catalyze the same reaction, but they also have GTs that are unique. Thus, protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 (POFUT1) in mammals and Ofut1 in flies transfer fucose to Notch receptors and are examples of an evolutionarily conserved GT. In contrast, flies do not make complex N-glycans with four branches, which are common in mammalian glycoproteins (Chapters 9 and 20). Additionally, flies make unique glycolipids absent from mammals that are important for conserved signaling pathways mediated by the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor or Notch receptors (Chapter 26).
The STT3A complex (OSTA), closely associated with the translocon, contains the KCP2 and DC2 subunits, whereas the STT3B complex (OSTB) that has either MAGT1 or TUSC3 (homologs of yeast Ost3p/Ost6p) glycosylates polypeptides posttranslationally after their translocation into the ER. On binding to the catalytic STT3 subunit, the client peptide adopts a 180° turn, making polypeptide folding a competing reaction for N-glycosylation. Indeed, the thioredoxin subunits of the OST complex (Ost3p/Ost6p; MAGT1/TUSC1) modulate the oxidative folding of the client polypeptide, thereby extending the polypeptide substrate range of OST. As of February 2021, the UniProt database reports 1911 N-glycosylation sites in yeast and 13,648 in murine glycoproteins.
About 150 years ago, E. Eichwald and E. Hoppe-Seyler noted that highly glycosylated proteins that contain hundreds of O-GalNAc glycans, which they termed mucins, are found throughout the body (Figure 10.1). Since then we have learned that O-GalNAc glycans are not only found as dense clusters on mucins, but also at single sites on most secreted and membrane-bound proteins. O-GalNAc glycans are involved in almost every aspect of biology, including cell–cell communication, cell adhesion, signal transduction, immune surveillance, epithelial cell protection, and host–pathogen interactions.
Other GSLs were later identified because they accumulate to pathological levels in tissues of patients with lysosomal storage diseases, genetic disorders in which glycan degrading enzymes are faulty or missing (Chapter 44). For example, a sialic acid–containing GSL (GM2) was first isolated from the brain of a victim of Tay–Sachs disease, in which it accumulates, and was named “ganglioside” based on its location in nerve clusters or “ganglia” in the brain. Likewise, glucosylceramide (GlcCer) was first isolated from the spleen of a Gaucher disease patient, where it accumulates. As purification, separation, and analytical techniques improved, GSLs were found in all vertebrate tissues. Hundreds of unique GSL structures were found that vary in glycan structures alone, each of which are presented on several distinct ceramides. Structures of representative glycosphingolipids (GSLs) and glycoglycerolipids. GSLs, such as GalCer, are built on a ceramide lipid moiety that consists of a long-chain amino alcohol (sphingosine) in amide linkage to a fatty acid. In comparison, glycoglycerolipids, (more...) Glycoglycerolipids are distinguished from GSLs by their lipid, having glycans linked to the C-3 hydroxyl of diacylglycerol or alkyl(acyl)glycerol (Figure 11.1).
The first tentative evidence for the existence of protein-phospholipid anchors appeared in 1963 with the finding that crude bacterial phospholipase C (PLC) selectively releases alkaline phosphatase from mammalian cells. Phosphatidylinositol (PI)-protein anchors were first postulated in the mid-1970s when highly purified bacterial PI-specific PLCs were observed to release proteins, such as alkaline phosphatase and 5′-nucleotidase, from mammalian plasma membranes. By 1985, these predictions were confirmed by compositional and structural data from studies on Torpedo acetylcholinesterase, human and bovine erythrocyte acetylcholinesterase, rat Thy-1, and the sleeping sickness parasite Trypanosoma brucei variant surface glycoprotein (VSG). The first complete GPI structures, which were for T. brucei VSG and rat Thy-1, were solved in 1988 (Chapter 1, Figure 1.3). To date, hundreds of GPI-anchored proteins (GPI-APs) have been identified in many eukaryotes, ranging from protozoa and fungi to plants and humans (Online Appendix 12A).
Proteins with EGF repeats harboring these O-glycans include several involved in blood clot formation and dissolution, and the Notch family of receptors and canonical Notch ligands (Delta and Serrate/Jagged) involved in cell fate decisions. These glycan modifications are important because they regulate signal transduction during embryonic development and adult organ maintenance, cell differentiation, and the growth of several cancers. Moreover, mutations in several enzymes involved in the addition or elongation of these glycans have been found in human diseases (Chapter 45).
Blood typing is used to ensure compatibility not only for red blood cell transfusions but also for transfusion with platelets and plasma. Similar ABO compatibility concerns are important in heart, kidney, liver, and bone marrow transplantation procedures. The “type and cross” procedures have virtually eliminated ABO blood group transfusion reactions in the developed world. Attempts are being made to enzymatically modify A or B erythrocytes using glycosidases to remove GalNAc (A) and/or Gal (B), in order to convert them to “O”, the “universal donor” type. The few individuals with AB type are “universal acceptors.” In addition to accurately typing AB blood types, A1 and A2 blood group distinctions are important clinically as A2 individuals can generate anti-A1 antibodies, although these antibodies are often not clinically meaningful. Furthermore, when crossing ABO(H) barriers during solid organ transplantation, A2 donor organs have better overall survival when compared to A1 following transplantation into a blood group O or B recipient; this is presumably because of the lower expression of the A antigen in A2 individuals.
Although 5-N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac, sometimes called “NANA”) is the most common sialic acid (Sia) in humans, the Sia family is comprised of related structures (Figure 15.1) that vary at the C-5 carbon, including 5-N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc) and 3-deoxy-D-glycero-D-galacto-non-2-ulosonic acid (also known as 3-deoxy-nonulosonic acid, 2-keto-3-deoxy-nononic acid, or Kdn) with a hydroxyl group at C-5. Similar 9-carbon backbone 2-keto acid monosaccharides were later discovered in some bacterial lipopolysaccharides and initially called “bacterial sialic acids.” The resulting confusion was resolved by suggesting that the term “sialic acid” (Sia) be limited to its original use in describing neuraminic acid (Neu), Kdn, and their derivatives in deuterostomes and their pathogens, and that the term “nonulosonic acid” (NulO) be used to encompass the entire group of 9-carbon backbone non-2-ulosonic acids (Figure 15.1).
The hyaluronan fragments may be returned to the extracellular space via recycling endosomes or enter a pathway to lysosomes for complete degradation to monosaccharides, probably involving HYAL1 and the two exoglycosidases β-glucuronidase and β-N-acetylglucosaminidase.
These enzymes are important control points because they ultimately regulate the type of glycosaminoglycan chain that will assemble. Control of the addition of β4GalNAc or α4GlcNAc appears to be manifested at the level of enzyme recognition of the polypeptide substrate. Keratan sulfate chains contain a mixture of nonsulfated (Galβ4GlcNAcβ3), monosulfated (Galβ4GlcNAc6Sβ3), and disulfated (Gal6Sβ4GlcNAc6Sβ3) disaccharide units (Figure 17.2).
An example of bacterial monoglycosylation that leads to a known function comes from the EF-P protein, the bacterial homolog of eukaryotic elongation initiation factor 5a. In some bacteria, EF-P suppresses translational stalling by a mechanism that involves oxidation of a critical lysyl residue, and its eukaryotic ortholog is regulated by hypusylation. A recent phylogenetic analysis of EF-P sequences revealed a subset of enzymes with an Arg in place of Lys, and a coevolving gene that was subsequently identified by biochemistry and mass spectrometry as an argininyl rhamnosyltransferase. Assembly of the Rha-Arg linkage activates EF-P and is required for pathogenicity of Pseudomonas, a Gram-negative, opportunistic human pathogen, and a number of other bacteria. The discovery of this linkage by a phylogenetic approach suggests that more noncanonical examples of glycosylation are yet to be discovered.
Short OGA is identical to full-length OGA (916 amino acids) for the first 662 amino acids but possesses an alternative carboxy-terminal sequence 15 amino acids in length. Sequence and structural analyses reveal that OGA contains an amino-terminal hexosaminidase domain and a carboxy-terminal domain, with homology to GCN5 histone acetyltransferases (HAT), separated by an intervening sequence. OGA forms an unusual arm-in-arm homodimer that is mediated by a helix within the intervening sequence. Dimerization is critical for activity and the formation of a substrate binding cleft. Notably, the HAT domain lacks the motif required for binding acetyl-CoA, indicating it lacks HAT enzymatic activity. Like OGT, OGA is thought to be regulated by its protein interactors, posttranslational modifications, and localization.
For instance, a baculovirus-encoded glucosyltransferase glycosylates insect host ecdysteroid hormones to block molting, and bacteriophage-derived glucosyltransferases modify 5-hydroxymethyl cytosine bases in the phage DNA to protect it from bacterial restriction enzymes. Host-derived glycosylation in enveloped viruses is typically extensive and the resulting “glycan shield” protects the virus from immune reactions against the underlying polypeptide. In this regard, it has been suggested that the high frequency of heterozygous states for human congenital disorders of glycosylation (Chapter 44) may reflect selection for genomes that limit glycosylation of invading viruses.
First, in addition to synthesizing surface structures, bacteria also produce intracellular glycans and cytoplasmic glycosylated proteins and glycolipids. For example, glycogen and trehalose act as storage compounds within some bacteria. Mycobacteria also contain a growing list of unusual glycosylated molecules, which may be related to their ability to withstand a variety of stresses. Second, bacteria produce a wide range of glycan-binding proteins. These include adhesins that facilitate bacterial colonization, exotoxins that bind to host membrane glycans, and single-sugar-binding proteins involved in metabolism (see Chapter 42). Third, bacterial lifestyles are often defined by their capacity to digest and/or metabolize glycans. Complex nanomachines have been described for the degradation of complex carbohydrate structures. Assembling the various enzymes into a highly organized complex affords synergy and efficiency. For example, the roles of glycosyl hydrolases in biomass conversion are well documented (Chapter 59).
N-glycosylation has been considered as assisting Archaea to cope with the challenges of the extreme environments they often occupy. For instance, enhanced surface charge in the face of hypersaline conditions and hence increased solubility was offered as an explanation for the high sulfated sugar content of N-linked glycans decorating the Hbt. salinarum S-layer glycoprotein relative to its Hfx. volcanii counterpart, given the higher salinity of the locale in which the former lives. In other instances, it is not clear how a given N-glycosylation profile contributes to life in harsh surroundings. In Hfx. volcanii, however, N-glycosylation may provide cells with the ability to respond to changes in the surrounding salinity.
As with other fungal pathogens, the surface glycans of A. fumigatus are critical for interactions with the host. The cell wall of infectious forms of this fungus is covered with specific proteins and melanin, presumably to alter surface properties and mask these structures from recognition by host immune receptors. The hyphal wall has a core of branched β1-3-glucan covalently linked to other glucan components, chitin, and galactomannan, which consists of a mannose backbone with short galactofuranose side chains. Interestingly, galactomannan also occurs anchored to the plasma membrane by a GPI. This polysaccharide is assembled in the Golgi apparatus and is probably transferred to the cell wall by transglycosidases, in the same way as GPI-anchored proteins.
It is composed of 12 different monosaccharides linked together by up to 21 distinct glycosidic linkages (Figure 24.2). Four structurally different side chains and one or two Araf substituents are attached to the galacturonan backbone. Two structurally conserved disaccharides (side chains C and D) are linked to O-3 of the backbone. The A and B side chains, which contain between 7 and 9 monosaccharides, are linked to O-2 of the backbone. Several of the monosaccharides in RG-II are O-methylated and/or O-acetylated. Virtually all of the RG-II exists in the primary wall as a dimer cross-linked by a borate ester. The ester is formed between the Apif residue in side chain A of each RG-II monomer (Figure 24.2). The dimer forms rapidly in vitro when the RG-II monomer is reacted with boric acid and a divalent cation. However, the mechanism and site of dimer formation in planta has not been determined. Borate cross-linking of RG-II is likely to have substantial effects on the properties of pectin and the primary wall as RG-II is itself linked to homogalacturonan (Figure 24.2).
Enzymatic and genomic data indicate that there are various domain-specific forms of glycosylation in C. elegans, including O-fucose (Fucα1-Ser/Thr) on epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like domains and thrombospondin type-1 repeats (TSRs), in the context of precise consensus sequences (Chapter 13), C-mannosylation of TSRs, and TMTC-dependent O-mannosylation of cadherins. However, POMT-mediated O-mannosylation of dystroglycan is absent. Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins in C. elegans can be modified with O-GlcNAc as in other animals. Biosynthesis of core-1 O-glycans in Caenorhabditis elegans (A) and some O-glycans proposed to occur in adult worms (B).
Arthropods are among the most successful species on Earth and are found in all types of environments. One of their characteristic features is an exoskeleton composed of chitin, which provides support and physical protection. The best-studied example is the fruit fly, D. melanogaster. In 1910, T.H. Morgan published the first paper about the genetics of D. melanogaster, which showed that white eye color was a sex-linked trait. Since then, this organism has been the predominant model organism for genetic analysis in animals. Its advantages include an easily studied developmental program, a sequenced and actively annotated genome, a relatively complex neural system, and the ability to discern literally thousands of different phenotypes in morphology, development, and behavior. In pursuit of genes that regulate development, many Drosophila geneticists ran head-on into glycans.
Bindin is thought to recognize glycans on EBR1. EBR1 itself has lectin-like domains, but its glycan ligands are unknown. Most studies of glycosylation in sea urchins have identified glycosyltransferase activities and the glycans they synthesize (e.g., including N-glycans with antennal β1-3-linked Gal, β1-4GalNAc, Neu5Gc, and sulphate residues as well as traces of the “invertebrate” feature of core α1-3/α1-6-difucosylation) (Figure 27.2). The functions of glycans and glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) can be investigated using genetic strategies in sea urchins, antisense morpholinos or short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) to knock down gene expression have been the methods of choice, but these will likely be superseded by more precise gene editing techniques such as the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/Cas9 (CRISPR/Cas9) strategy or transcription activator–like effector (TALE) nucleases (TALENs).
A limitation of these approaches is that binding activity does not directly indicate a biological function and the roles of many well-characterized GBPs have not been fully determined. The observation that many lectins fall into structurally distinct families provides an alternative way to identify novel GBPs through analysis of protein sequences. Sequence motifs characteristic of CRDs are routinely used to screen sequences from whole genome sequencing. These motifs can also be used to screen specific cDNA and gene sequences of interest because of their association with biological functions.
The material bound to the bead-GBP may then be eluted for measurement and further analyses. Using this pull-down setup, one can perform a concentration-dependent binding assay to obtain an apparent Ka of the ligand for the immobilized GBP. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) is one of the most rigorous means of defining the equilibrium binding constant between a glycan and a GBP or indeed any protein and its ligand. The binding of a glycan to the GBP is measured as a change in enthalpy using a commercial microcalorimeter. In this technique, a solution containing a glycan of interest is added in increments into a solution containing a fixed concentration of GBP. The glycan is added at many intervals and the heat evolved from binding is measured relative to a reference cell. Over the course of the experiment, the concentration of glycan is increased in the mixing cell over a glycan-to-GBP molar ratio of 0–10. The heat absorbed or evolved during binding is determined and the data are replotted as kcal/mole of injectant versus the molar ratio (Figure 29.4).
The fundamental understanding of glycan–protein interactions, as enriched by experimental studies of all types, has now been encoded in powerful molecular simulation programs that provide a computational approach to generating three dimensional pictures of glycan–protein complexes. These are important because it is difficult to produce complex glycan ligands in the amounts and purity required for most experimental approaches. These methods, although still evolving toward increased confidence in outcomes, provide models for experimentally inaccessible systems that can be tested with a variety of nonstructural approaches. They can also be leveraged with sparse structural data that alone could not provide detailed structural information.
RCA-I (molecular mass ∼120 kDa) is a hemagglutinin and a very weak toxin. RCA-II (∼60 kDa), better known as ricin, is an agglutinin and a very potent toxin. Ricin is easily extractable from castor beans and can kill humans at very small doses. RCA-II (ricin; Figure 31.2) is synthesized as a single prepropolypeptide of 576 amino acid (aa) residues containing a secretion signal peptide (residues 1–35), an A chain (residues 36–302), a 12-aa linker region (residues 303–314), and a B chain (residues 315–576). The A-chain toxin is an N-glycoside hydrolase (EC 3.2.2.22) that inactivates the 60S ribosome. The B-chain lectin domain binds to galactose (Gal) and β-galactosides. The amino-terminal signal sequence brings the propolypeptide to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where the signal is cleaved off, and the polypeptide is glycosylated.
The glycan-binding and metal-binding sites are localized in close proximity to each other at the top of the “front” sheet. The glycan-binding site is composed of four loops: A, B, C, and D (Figure 32.3, top). These loops contain four invariant amino acids that are essential for carbohydrate binding (Figure 32.3, bottom). Loop A contains an invariant aspartate, which forms hydrogen bonds between its side chain and the glycan ligand. This amino acid is linked to its preceding amino acid (usually alanine) by a rare cis-peptide bond, which is stabilized by the metal ions and is necessary for the proper orientation of the aspartate in the combining site. Loop B contains an invariant glycine, which also forms hydrogen bonds with the ligand.
This secretion–recapture pathway is a minor one in most cells, but plays a critical role in enzyme replacement therapy. As described in Chapter 44, there are many genetic disorders in glycan degradation that result from decreased activity of a given lysosomal enzyme. Some of these enzymes that are targeted to lysosomes via the M6P pathway have been prepared in large quantities as recombinant soluble proteins and used in enzyme replacement therapy. To date, the benefits have been variable but less than optimal. There are a number of potential reasons for this. First, some of the preparations may not contain the physiologic complement of the phosphomannosyl recognition marker. It is reasonable to suggest that a greater M6P content may improve the efficacy of enzyme replacement in these patients. This has been shown to be the case in mouse and dog model systems. However, even with fully phosphorylated enzymes there may be obstacles that are difficult to overcome. For example, some cell types in the body may not express adequate levels of the CI-MPR on their surfaces to endocytose sufficient enzyme to restore normal lysosomal function. Also, the organ that is most seriously affected in many of these diseases (the brain) is inaccessible because of the blood–brain barrier. Although the first intraventricular M6P-dependent enzyme replacement therapy for children deficient for the lysosomal tripeptidyl peptidase 1 are very promising, further studies are needed.
CTLs include collectins, selectins, endocytic receptors, and proteoglycans, some of which are secreted and others are transmembrane proteins. They often oligomerize, which increases their avidity for multivalent ligands and enhance recognition of pattern recognition receptor (PRRs). CTLs differ significantly in the types of ligands that they recognize with high affinity (e.g., glycans, proteins, lipids, and inorganic compounds). These proteins that recognize pathogens or self-expressed ligands function as adhesion, phagocytic, and signaling receptors in many pathways, including homeostasis and innate and adaptive immunity, and are crucial in inflammatory responses, leukocyte and platelet trafficking, and tissue remodeling. The CTL family is remarkably diverse and is the largest family of known GBPs.
Recombinant soluble CD22 can precipitate a subset of glycoproteins from B-cell lysates including CD45, a major sialoprotein of T and B cells. However, on B cells, CD22 appears to mainly be either cis-associated with other CD22 molecules in a glycan-dependent manner, or with the BCR, which it inhibits in a glycan-independent manner. These interactions are consistent with studies of mouse mutants that either lack CD22 glycan ligands or express mutated forms of CD22 unable to bind glycans. B cells from ST6Gal-I-deficient mice that lack CD22 ligands show an anergic phenotype, essentially the opposite of the phenotype observed in CD22-deficient mice. Mice expressing a lectin-inactive version of CD22 with a mutated binding site arginine also show reduced BCR signaling (anergy) and, similar to ST6Gal-I-deficient mice, they show increased CD22-BCR association and stronger CD22 phosphorylation (Figure 35.3). Likewise, Cmah-null mice deficient in Neu5Gc have reduced ligands for mouse CD22 and Siglec-G (see below) and show B cell hyperactivity.
Soon thereafter, in 1976, similar β-galactoside-binding lectins were isolated from chicken muscle and from extracts of calf heart and lung (∼15 kDa; now designated as galectin-1). These proteins were initially referred to as S-type lectins to denote their sulfhydryl dependency, presence of free cysteine residues, and solubility, along with shared primary sequence. In the early 1980s, a 35-kDa protein termed CBP35 that also bound to β-galactosides was identified in mouse fibroblasts. The same protein was studied by other groups under the names IgE-binding protein, L-29, and L-31 and is currently known as galectin-3. The nomenclature for galectins was systematized in 1994 and the first galectin type found (∼15 kDa, discussed above) retained the name galectin-1. All other members of this family were numbered consecutively by order of discovery.
This is relevant for urinary tract infections, in which type-1 fimbriae mediate binding of the bacteria to the glycoprotein uroplakin Ia on the surface of bladder epithelial cells. Uroplakin Ia presents high levels of terminally exposed mannose residues that are capable of specifically interacting with FimH. Alternatively, type-1 fimbriae can bind to high mannose glycans on the soluble urinary Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein/uromodulin, that forms long fibers. The resulting bacterial aggregates are flushed out of the urinary tract. Mice lacking the gene encoding the Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein are considerably more susceptible to bladder colonization by type-1-fimbriated E. coli than normal mice.
To a large extent, studies of the GAG-interactome have focused on protein interactions with heparin, a more highly sulfated, iduronic acid (IdoA)-rich form of heparan sulfate (HS; Chapter 17). This bias reflects, in part, the commercial availability of heparin and heparin-Sepharose, which are frequently used for fractionation studies, and the partially incorrect assumption that binding to heparin mimics binding to HS present on cell surfaces and in the extracellular matrix. There are also a large number of proteins known to interact with chondroitin sulfate (CS) and dermatan sulfate (DS) with comparable avidity and affinity; there are fewer examples of specific interactions with keratan sulfate (KS), but this may reflect fewer studies of KS. In some cases, CS may be the physiologically relevant ligand because CS predominates in many tissues. Determining the physiological relevance of these interactions is a major area of research.
First, cleavage occurs between the two GlcNAcs (chitobiose) in the core of the N-glycan via a cytoplasmic endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase. A cytoplasmic α-mannosidase cleaves up to four Man residues to generate Man5GlcNAc (Man c, d, e, f, and g in Figure 39.1). This glycan is then taken into the lysosome via an ATP-dependent lysosomal membrane transporter for final degradation to monosaccharides. Whether these free glycans have any function in the cytosolic/nuclear compartment before they are degraded has not been investigated.
The OST complex becomes dysfunctional in the presence of carboxy-terminal truncated TREX1. This leads to the release of free glycans from dolichol-linked oligosaccharides, which has been hypothesized to lead to the activation of genes with immune system-related functions and the production of autoantibodies. Thus, TREX1 may safeguard the cell against free glycan buildup in the ER and thereby prevent glycan and glycosylation defects that can lead to immune disorders. N-linked glycans have a role in the correct folding of glycoproteins in the ER. Misfolded glycoproteins are targeted for degradation by an ER-associated degradation (ERAD) process in which they are retrotranslocated into the cytosol (Chapter 39). The glycans are then released from the glycoprotein by the N-glycanase NGLY1. The protein is degraded by the proteasome, whereas the released glycans are likely partially de-mannosylated in the cytosol and then transported to the lysosomes by an as yet unidentified oligosaccharide transporter. It is not known if these free glycans have any signaling functions in the cytosolic/nuclear compartment.
Genetic modifications that eliminate initial steps of major glycan synthetic pathways and of some monosaccharide biosynthetic pathways generally result in embryonic lethality, with one exception being deletion of individual genes needed for initiation of mucin O-GalNAc pathway, likely because of functional redundancy among the 20 different polypeptide:O-GalNAc transferases (Chapter 10). The causes of these lethal outcomes usually cannot be linked to specific glycoconjugates, but sometimes can be ascribed to a single mechanism such as the disruption of protein O-fucosylation, which impacts global Notch receptor signaling (Chapter 13). Conversely, loss of terminal glycan modifications are usually not embryonic-lethal, instead they have specific defects in some cell types.
For example, the filamentous hemagglutinin (FHA) of Bordetella pertussis promotes strong attachment of the bacteria to the ciliated epithelial cells of the bronchi and trachea, triggering local inflammation and tissue injury that results in the “whooping cough” disease. FHA is a component of modern pertussis vaccines given in infancy and early childhood to block infection. Examples of mechanisms of bacterial adherence to host cell surfaces. (A) Pili or fimbriae are organelles that project from the cell surface. They are made up of a repeating structural subunit and a protein at their tip that mediates recognition of a specific (more...) Adhesins can be glycoproteins as well. In Pasteurellaceae and some H. influenzae strains adhesins are N-glucosylated by a cytoplasmic N-glucosylation system that is homologous to the cytoplasmic O-GlcNAc transferase of eukaryotes. Similarly, transfer of heptose residues by the dodecameric bacterial autotransporter heptosyltransferase (BAHT) family of enzymes to autotransporter adhesins in several different Gram-negative pathogens is essential for the adhesion process.
VSGs are dimeric proteins, consisting of two 55-kDa monomers that each carry N-linked oligomannose-type glycans, which make up a large component of the dense glycocalyx. As parasites multiply in the host bloodstream, the host mounts an immune response that is effective against only the population of trypanosomes expressing a particular VSG. Trypanosomes that have switched to an alternative VSG coat (encoded among 1000 distinct VSG genes) escape immunological destruction.
By creating multiple internal membranes seen in typical MVBs, the target molecules are exposed to the soluble lysosomal enzymes, and digestion proceeds efficiently on the membrane surfaces of these internal vesicles. MVB formation starts with inward budding of the limiting endosomal membrane. Lipids and proteins are sorted to either the internal or the limiting membrane. Ubiquitination of cargo proteins targets them to internal vesicles of MVBs, but ubiquitin-independent routes also exist. Intra-endosomal membranes and limiting endosomal membrane have different lipid and protein compositions. Membrane segregation and lipid sorting prepare the internal membranes for lysosomal degradation. During maturation of the internal membranes, cholesterol is continually stripped away (to <1%) and a negatively charged lipid bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate (BMP) increases up to 45%. This molecule is highly resistant to phospholipases. BMP also stimulates sphingolipid degradation on the inner membranes of acidic compartments. Because BMP is not present in the lysosomal outer membrane, the unique lipid profile ensures that degradation by hydrolases and membrane-disrupting SAPs occurs without digesting the lysosomal outer membrane. Degradation of glycans is not always complete.
In retrospect, the difficulty arose from the pleiotropic multisystem nature of the clinical presentations. Meanwhile Belgian pediatrician Jaak Jaeken noted unusual profiles of serum proteins in some children with multisystem disorders and decided to apply a previously established test to separate transferrin isoforms. The test was positive in these children, thereby, for the first time, indicating a generic defect in protein N-glycosylation. Lacking further details about glycan structures and the underlying genetic variants, Jaeken decided to call these cases “carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndromes” (CDGS). Several years later, many people defined primary inherited genetic defects in glycosylation pathways in many such cases. To keep the acronym “CDG,” those involved also decided to call them “congenital disorders of glycosylation,” rather than inherited genetic defects in glycosylation. Nearly all inherited disorders in glycan biosynthesis were discovered in the last 20 years.
For example, some pathogenic strains of E. coli infect the urinary tract using a lectin that binds the P blood group antigens (Chapter 14), with P negative individuals being immune. The E. coli P fimbriae lectins are also involved in spreading bacterial infections from the kidney to the bloodstream. Binding of the spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2, the virus causing COVID-19, to its ACE2 receptor on host epithelial cells first involves its initial binding to neighboring HS glycosaminoglycan chains, which induces a conformational change to enhance binding to ACE2. Importantly, mutations that alter spike glycosylation sites (e.g., variant B.1.1.7 (N501Y)) impact infectivity. Some pathogenic microorganisms secrete sialidases (neuraminidases), which usually remain at the site of infection.
Humans show variable levels of circulating antibodies against Neu5Gc-containing epitopes. The resulting weak immune response (termed “xenosialitis”) can promote tumor growth by enhancing chronic inflammation and angiogenesis. Given this selective advantage, it is not surprising that tumors are better at accumulating Neu5Gc in the face of an increased immune response. Because the primary dietary source of Neu5Gc is red meat, this may help explain the increased cancer risk associated with its consumption. SLex and SLea epitopes (Chapter 14) were first identified as tumor antigens on glycosphingolipids. Expression of these antigens by epithelial carcinomas correlates with metastatic potential in mice and with tumor progression, metastatic spread, and poor prognosis in humans. SLex and SLea epitopes on glycoprotein ligands are key recognition determinants of the selectins (Chapter 34).
There are also other forms of isolation, including salt precipitation, ion exchange chromatography, gel filtration, and the capture of a tagged and recombinant chimeric-lectin by capture of the tag (e.g., His tag). A recent method exploits a “capture and release” approach, in which multivalent ligands recognized by a lectin are assembled, whereby they can capture the lectin of interest, and then filtration or centrifugation may be used to isolate the lectin complexed with ligand. The lectin can then be dissociated and is available for study. Any of these type of methods are also useful when combined with proteomic analyses in identifying novel lectins and protein complexes that bind to glycans. The classic approaches for using antibodies, CBMs, and lectins to characterize cell-surface glycoconjugates are histochemistry (lectins) and immunohistochemistry (antibodies), flow cytometry with cell sorting, and cell agglutination. In histochemistry and immunohistochemistry, tissues are prepared and fixed as usual for histological staining, and then incubated with appropriate biotinylated or peroxidase-labeled lectins or antibodies (glycolipids are extracted during standard paraffin embedding procedures and require frozen sections for sensitive detection). The bound lectins, CBMs, or antibodies are then visualized by means of secondary reagents, such as streptavidin-peroxidase or labeled secondary antibody.
Regardless of the method used to induce mutations, selection or enrichment is usually needed to find rare recessive or dominant mutants bearing a desired glycosylation phenotype (Figure 49.1). For example, direct selection for resistance to cytotoxic plant lectins (Chapters 31 and 32) that bind to cell-surface glycans gives a range of glycosylation mutants. Importantly, many mutants resistant to one or more lectins because of the loss of specific sugars become supersensitive to a different group of lectins that recognize sugar residues exposed by the mutation (Figure 49.2). The latter may be used to select for revertants in the original mutant population. Nontoxic lectins are also useful for enriching lectin-binding mutants (e.g., by flow cytometry). Mutations that affect all stages of glycosylation reactions, including the generation and transport of nucleotide sugars, have been identified using lectins as selective agents.
Glycosidic linkages are then cleaved by acid hydrolysis, producing partially methylated monosaccharides with free hydroxyl groups at the positions that were previously involved in a linkage. The partially methylated monosaccharides are ring-opened with a reducing agent (normally borodeuteride) to introduce a new hydroxyl group and, more importantly, a deuterium atom at C-1, which helps identify the reducing end of each monosaccharide. All the free hydroxyl groups are then acetylated resulting in partially methylated alditol acetates (PMAAs) that can be identified by a combination of GC retention times and electron impact (EI)-MS (Figure 50.2). The masses of fragments produced by impact of high-energy electrons on PMAAs identify substitution sites in some cases, but fragmentation patterns of similarly substituted isomeric monosaccharides (e.g., Glc and Gal) can be nearly identical. Thus, definitive identification of monosaccharides requires, in addition to the analysis of the MS pattern, a comparison of GC retention times with those of known standards (e.g., all peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-methyl-hexoses produce the same EI-MS spectrum, but peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-methyl-galactitol elutes later than peracetylated 2,3,4-tri-O-methyl-glucitol). This type of analysis identifies terminal residues (they are methylated at every position except the hydroxyl group at C-1 and the ring oxygen), indicates how each monosaccharide is substituted, including the occurrence of linkage and branching points, and allows the determination of the ring size (pyranose [p] or furanose [f]) for each monosaccharide.
These modifications, combined with alternative RNA splicing in eukaryotes, render the proteome considerably more complex than the transcriptome. Although it has been estimated that approximately 120,000 different protein splice forms are expressed by human cells, the total number of modified proteoforms is likely to be at least an order of magnitude higher. The systems-level analysis of all proteins expressed by cells, tissues, or organisms is known as “proteomics.” The proteome, like the transcriptome, but unlike the DNA sequence of the genome, is fundamentally dynamic. The repertoire of proteins expressed by a cell is highly dependent on tissue type, microenvironment, and stage within the life cycle. As cells receive external and internal cues in the form of growth factors, hormones, metabolites, or cell–cell interactions, the expression of various genes is modulated and may be transcribed at levels ranging from silence to more than 104 mRNA copies per cell and 107 protein molecules per cell. Thus, proteomes and their modifications vary during cell differentiation, activation, trafficking, and malignant transformation. However, no systems-level analysis of a biological process is complete without interrogating the glycome, defined as the entire complement of glycan structures (be it protein-/lipid-bound or -free) produced by cells, in addition to the genome, transcriptome, proteome, lipidome and metabolome.
Another effort, GlycoRDF, is a proposed standard ontology for glycan and related metadata using Resource Description Framework (RDF) to provide consistent terminologies for representing glycan sequences, related biological sources, publications, and experimental data on the Semantic Web. GlycoRDF is now being used by several glycomics database providers, to enable large-scale integration of diverse data collections in the glycosciences. For example, GlyTouCan uses the GlycoRDF ontology to represent the registered data such that other data resources also using this ontology can be integrated and queried by glycan structure. Different information resources (e.g., databases and publications) can reference these identifiers, thus facilitating identification and interpretation of diverse but complementary data sets that embody information about specific glycan structures. The Semantic Web is a new technology that provides a framework for making data available directly on the Internet, provided with semantics, such that inferences can be made automatically based on the data. For example, a researcher often refers to various publications to derive a new hypothesis to test. Using the Semantic Web, the data in the publications would be formatted in such a way (using predefined vocabulary, or ontologies) that the meaning behind the data is preserved in a computable form, on the Web. Because a common vocabulary, or ontology, would be used across different publications in different websites (i.e., journals), the terminology used to encapsulate the semantics is preserved.
Enzymes can be used together with chemical methods to prepare diverse glycans (Chapter 54). The structure of oligosaccharides render their synthesis more complicated than the synthesis of the other major classes of biomolecules: oligonucleotides and oligopeptides. Fundamental challenges of glycan synthesis are the requirement for modifying one specific hydroxyl group in the presence of many others, and control over the stereochemical outcome in the creation of a glycosidic linkage. Commonly, glycan synthesis is characterized by the manipulation of various protecting groups, chemical moieties that mask the hydroxyl groups and prevent them from reacting with other chemical reagents. Hydroxyl-protecting groups are selectively added and removed from glycan structures, allowing for chemical alteration of the exposed hydroxyl groups. Subsequently, in a typical glycan synthesis scheme, the exposed hydroxyl group serves as a point for further elaboration. The selective exposure of one hydroxyl group allows for regioselective addition of another saccharide unit. Synthetic schemes of this type are commonly applied to the generation of O- and N-linked glycans (see Chapters 9 and 10) as well as proteoglycans (see Chapter 17) and glycosphingolipids (see Chapter 11). The choice of protecting groups and the order of protecting group installation are essential for a successful synthetic route.
Wild-type endohexosaminidase, Endo-A, recognizes this high-mannose N-glycan and hydrolyses the GlcNAc-GlcNAc glycosidic linkage, to yield Man9GlcNAc 25. After peracetylation, treatment with trimethylsilyl bromide and borontrifluoride etherate, and global deprotection provided oxazolidinium ion 27. This compound is a good substrate for mutant (N175A) endohexosaminidase, endo-M, which was identified by site-directed mutagenesis as a putative glycosynthase activity. In the final step, the efficacy of the endo-M glycosynthase was demonstrated by the construction of high-mannose N-glycan 28 from 26 and 27. Enzymatic synthesis has proven to be a powerful methodology for the construction of complex glycans.
These advances have stimulated greater interest into influenza neuraminidase as well as the four human neuraminidases, which have poorly understood physiological roles. A major challenge associated with viral neuraminidase inhibitors—most strikingly, Tamiflu—is the rapid development of mutations that confer resistance. An alternative approach to circumvent this problem has been to develop mechanism-based inhibitors that covalently inhibit the enzyme. One example, FaxGuDFSA, has a fluoride leaving group, the displacement of which by the neuraminidase forms a glycosyl–enzyme intermediate. This intermediate has an appreciable half-life because the electronegative fluorine destabilizes the oxocarbenium ion-like transition state that leads to its breakdown.
Engineering this pathway in bacteria resulted in the assembly of glycan motifs including α1-3-galactose epitopes as well as fucosylated and sialylated lactose or poly-N-acetyllactosamine (LacNAc) units primed by Glc residues on glycoproteins (Table 56.1). Although most bacteria do not have the capacity for sialylation, there are exceptions (Chapters 15 and 21). Bacterial genes for CMP-sialic acid synthesis and for sialyltransferases with specificities similar to those in mammals have been introduced with plasmids or integrated into the genome of host bacteria cells, enabling the production of sialylated N- and O-glycoproteins. Some bacteria have processive O-glycosylation pathways controlled by glycosyltransferases using activated sugar donors. These pathways inspired the engineering of human O-glycosylation reactions in E. coli. By introducing mammalian polypeptide GalNAc-transferase genes and a UDP-Glc/GlcNAc 4-epimerase, O-GalNAc protein glycosylation (Chapter 10) has been achieved. Further introduction of a β1-3-galactosyltransferase enabled biosynthesis of core 1 O-glycans (T antigen) on cytoplasmic acceptor proteins. Introduction of GalNAc residues has been used for postexpression enzymatic addition of polyethylene glycol (PEG)-derivatized sialic acids to enhance the therapeutic properties of protein drugs.
The success of glucocerebrosidase treatment stimulated the development of lysosomal enzymes for treatment of other lysosomal storage diseases such as Fabry's disease, mucopolysaccharidoses type I, II, and VI, and Pompe's disease. The replacement therapies clearly have beneficial effects and prolong life but are extremely expensive. A third approach for treating lysosomal storage disorders takes advantage of the fact that some genetic defects lead to misfolding of the encoded enzyme in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Low-molecular-weight competitive inhibitors of some of these enzymes can act as “chaperones,” which stabilize the folded enzyme in the ER and effectively rescue the mutation and increase the steady state concentration of active enzyme in the lysosome. The dose of the inhibitor must be carefully adjusted to ensure that the inhibitory effects on enzyme function do not overshadow beneficial effects on folding. Only a low level of enzyme restoration is needed to significantly reduce the accumulation of undigested glycan substrates, indicating that lysosomal hydrolases are normally present in large catalytic excess.
The number and the presentation of carbohydrate residues on a biomolecule are major determinants of binding avidity of ligands to cell-surface receptors. The transition from monovalent to multivalent is often associated with a larger variation in affinity/avidity, suggesting a “thresholding” effect, and in some cases cooperativity. To elucidate those mechanisms, glycans have to be displayed in a scenario closer to that found on the cellular scale. “Nanotechnology” moves from the angstrom to the nanometer range (from ∼10−10 to ∼10−7 m), offering the tools to create, manipulate, and characterize structures on those scales. Large glycoconjugates bearing multiple copies of a carbohydrate on various scaffolds, such as glycodendrimers or glycopolymers, have been generated to probe carbohydrate–protein interactions.
Such materials have found increasing use as research tools to study the biological functions of glycans and are currently explored as biomaterials for drug delivery or as antifouling and antifreeze agents. Nanomaterials from plants and crustacean shells offer new materials for the development of biorenewable and biocompatible products. These nano-sized particles, consisting of bundled polymer chains, have properties and function that are different from the isolated polymer chains from which they are made. Such nanomaterials can be produced from cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, chitin and chitosan. A more focused description is given below on nanomaterials from cellulose. Polysaccharides that have little or no branching of their backbone can self-assemble to form ordered structures in which the individual polymer chains stack along the chain axis, thus forming a crystalline structure. Cellulose is one example of a plant polysaccharide that has this type of crystalline structure. During cellulose biosynthesis individual glucan chains assemble to form microfibril structures that contain both crystalline and disordered arrangements (see Figure 59.1A). The high mechanical stiffness and tensile strength along the length of the cellulose microfibrils provide high mechanical strength, high strength-to-weight ratio, and toughness to plant tissues and organs.
Given all these major advances in basic and applied research on glycans, there is no reason why this major class of biomolecules should continue to be the “dark matter of the biological universe.” However, since the 1980s an entire generation of scientists have been largely trained without much exposure to, or knowledge of, glycans. Thus, it will still be awhile before these molecules return to their rightful place in the mainstream of thinking in conventional molecular and cellular biology and medicine. Continued advances in basic and applied research on glycans will occur, but this needs to be coupled with the training of a new generation of scientists, engineers, and physicians for whom these molecules will be an obvious aspect of their understanding of living systems in health and disease. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) of the United States has recognized the importance of training scientists and clinicians in glycosciences by establishing a National Career Development Consortium for Excellence in Glycosciences (K12), which focuses on immersive training of medical and research professionals in all aspects of glycosciences. In addition, the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) has funded the first graduate student training grant (T32) in glycosciences. Clearly, the teaching of glycosciences in all training programs for graduate and medical professionals will be essential if we are to continue to make medical advances in nearly all areas. As emphasized in a report from the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences, nearly every disease process that affects humans and other animals involves glycans (Chapters 39–47). In past decades, it has been realized that most functions of complex glycans are required at the multicellular (organismic) level. In contrast, cycling monosaccharides (e.g., O-GlcNAc in the nucleus and cytoplasm) serve regulatory functions at the single-cell level. The significance of nucleocytoplasmic O-glycosylation was broadened by the discoveries that an evolutionary branch of O-GlcNAc transferase is in fact an O-fucosyltransferase (OFT) that modifies many proteins in plants, protists, and protist pathogens like Toxoplasma and Cryptosporidium, with O-Fuc instead of O-GlcNAc (Chapters 18 and 19). The critical roles of complex glycans in the biology of intact organisms have been dramatically illustrated by the contrast between the viability of glycosyltransferase mutant cell lines in culture (Chapter 49) with the often lethal outcome caused by inactivation of the same enzymes in living organisms (Chapter 41). Transgenic mouse studies and the severe phenotypes of human congenital disorders of glycosylation (Chapter 45) have dramatically revealed the critical importance of glycans in development, physiology, and disease. Most major diseases also involve disordered inflammation and immunity, in which the glycan-binding selectins, Siglecs, galectins, and other glycan-binding proteins (Chapters 34–36) play critical roles. Most pathogens, viruses, bacteria, and parasites gain entry to cells by binding to glycans on the cell surface (Chapters 42 and 43). Recently, many studies have shown an essential role for complex glycans in SARS-CoV-2 infections and a role for O-GlcNAcylation in viral-induced cytokine storms (Chapter 19). In addition, many vaccines against infectious agents are directed against microbial glycans. Proteoglycans play critical roles in development, tissue morphogenesis, and cardiovascular disease and in regulating the actions of cytokines and growth factors. The glycosaminoglycan heparin is one of the oldest and most commonly used “drugs” in the clinic. Notch signaling, which plays a major role in controlling morphogenesis in development and cell fate decisions, is controlled by glycans (Chapter 13), and glycans on the surface of tumor cells play critical roles in tumor progression and metastasis (Chapter 47). Many of the current therapeutics in use or under development are glycoproteins, like monoclonal antibodies, which often require particular types of N-glycans for functional efficacy. Defects in the synthesis of glycan chains on dystroglycan underlie many types of congenital muscular dystrophy (Chapter 45). Dysregulated O-GlcNAcylation contributes to the etiologies of diabetes, neurodegeneration, cardiovascular disease, and cancer (Chapter 19). Although the few scientists and physicians well-educated in glycobiology are acutely aware of the importance of glycans in disease, most others have not learned much about this major class of molecules. However, it is now clear that studies of glycans will be essential for understanding the pathophysiology of most diseases and the development of effective therapies.
