A more complete paradigm of molecular biology must therefore include glycans, often in covalent combination with other macromolecules (i.e., glycoconjugates, such as glycoproteins and glycolipids). In analogy to the current situation in Cosmology, glycans can be considered as the “dark matter” of the biological universe: a major and critical component that has yet to be fully incorporated into the “standard model” of biology.
Monosaccharide names are frequently abbreviated; most common are three-letter abbreviations for simple monosaccharides (e.g., Gal, Glc, Man, Xyl, Fuc). There are nine common monosaccharides found in vertebrate glycoconjugates (Figure 2.4). Once incorporated into a glycan, these nine monosaccharide building blocks can be further modified to generate additional sugar structures.
In solution, NMR studies show IdoA2S and IdoA residues to be present in a mixture of 1C4 and 2S0 conformations. The conformational flexibility in IdoA residues likely allows orientation of the sulfate groups in HS to maximize the binding affinity to proteins.
After more than three billion years of evolution, every free-living cell and every cell type within eukaryotic organisms remains covered with a dense and complex layer of glycans (Chapter 20). Even enveloped viruses that bud from infected cells carry with them the glycosylation patterns of the host. Additionally, most secreted molecules are glycosylated and extracellular matrices of multicellular organisms are rich in glycans and glycoconjugates. Matrices secreted by unicellular organisms when they congregate (e.g., bacterial biofilms [Chapter 21]) also contain glycans. Thus, evolution has repeatedly and consistently selected glycans as being the most diverse and flexible molecules to position at the interface between cells and the extracellular milieu.
In eukaryotic cells, glycosylation occurs mostly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus, whereas monosaccharide activation and interconversions occur mostly in the cytoplasm. Nucleotide sugar–specific transporters carry activated sugar donors into the Golgi and to a lesser extent into the ER. In some cases, nucleotide sugars are used to synthesize activated lipid-linked intermediates before glycan transfer. This chapter describes how cells accomplish these tasks, with an emphasis on animal cells.
The biosynthesis of glycans is primarily determined by glycosyltransferases that assemble monosaccharide moieties into linear and branched glycan chains. As might be expected from the complex array of glycan structures found in nature, glycosyltransferases constitute a very large family of enzymes.
Over the years, many theories have been advanced regarding biological roles of glycans. Although there is evidence to support all the theories, exceptions to each one can also be found. This should not be surprising, given the abundance and enormous diversity of glycans in nature. Complexities also arise because glycans are frequently bound by microbes and microbial toxins, making them a liability to the organism that synthesizes them. Biological functions of glycans can be divided into three broad categories:
The glycome comprises all the glycan structures synthesized by an organism. It is analogous to the genome, the transcriptome, and/or the proteome but even more dynamic, and it has higher structural complexity that has yet to be fully defined. Cells of different types synthesize a subset of the glycome based on their differentiation state and physiological environment.
In mammals, there are two different catalytic STT3 subunits that both associate with ribophorins I and II, OST48, OST4, and DAD1 proteins (homologs of the yeast Ost1p, Swp1p, Wbp1p, Ost4p, and Ost2p, respectively).
Sialic acids may be modified by O-acetylation, and Gal and GlcNAc by sulfation. The length of O-GalNAc glycans may vary from a single GalNAc to more than 20 sugar residues and can include blood group and other glycan epitopes. This chapter describes the structures, biosynthesis, and functions of O-GalNAc glycans in mammals.
Nearly all glycolipids in vertebrates are GSLs, which, in turn, are part of the larger family of sphingolipids (lipids built on sphingoid bases) that includes the major membrane phospholipid, sphingomyelin, and the second messenger sphingosine 1-phosphate that regulates angiogenesis and immune cell trafficking.
Proteins attached to glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) via their carboxyl termini are generally found in the outer leaflet of the lipid bilayer facing the extracellular environment. The GPI membrane anchor may be conveniently thought of as an alternative to the single transmembrane domain of type-I integral membrane proteins. This chapter reviews the discovery, distribution, structure, biosynthesis, properties, and suggested functions of GPI anchors and related molecules, as well as their roles in diseases.
Other classes of eukaryotic glycoprotein glycosylation  EGF repeats, also known as EGF domains, are small protein domains (∼40 amino acids) defined by six conserved Cys residues, which form three disulfide bonds (Figure 13.1A). They are found in a few hundred cell-surface and secreted proteins in metazoans and, depending on their sequence, may be modified with O-glycans as described in Table 13.1.
Blood banks perform typing and cross-matching assays. First, units of erythrocyte products typed for the A and B antigens are chosen to match the patient's ABO type. To ensure that these are truly “compatible,” the patient's serum is cross-matched by mixing with a small aliquot of each prospective erythrocyte unit. Erythrocytes of compatible units do not agglutinate (form an erythrocyte clump), whereas incompatibility is indicated by agglutinated erythrocytes formed by antibodies in the patient's serum.
Given their high density and widespread location on vertebrate cells, Sias also exert many functions via electronegative charge, such as repulsion of cell–cell interactions, protein stabilization, ion binding, and ion transport. Early nomenclature of these molecules was tied to their discovery, being first isolated by Gunnar Blix from salivary mucins in 1936 and independently by Ernst Klenk from brain glycolipids in 1941. Blix named his substance “sialic acid” after the Greek word for saliva (σíαλoν), and Klenk named his “neuraminic acid” for neurons in the brain. By the time the relationship of these substances became evident, both names were already in use and have persisted.
Large hyaluronan polymers in the extracellular space can be internalized following interaction with cell-surface receptors that trigger endocytosis, which may be facilitated by the membrane-associated hyaluronidases, HYAL2 and/or TMEM2, or through association with CEMIP.
Genetic evidence from studies of C. elegans suggests that N-acetylgalactosamine addition during chondroitin assembly is mediated by the same enzyme that is involved in chain polymerization (Sqv5), but biochemical evidence suggests that more than one enzyme may exist in vertebrates. In heparin/heparan sulfate formation, the addition of the first N-acetylglucosamine residue is catalyzed by an enzyme called EXTL3, which differs from the transferases involved in heparan polymerization (called EXT1 and EXT2).
Highly conserved homologs of OGT and OFT are found in numerous bacterial genomes, although studies of their functional roles are essentially nonexistent.
OGA was purified from rat kidney and bovine brain, and the human gene was cloned using peptide sequence information. The OGA gene was found to be identical to MGEA5, a putative hyaluronidase genetically identified because of its association with meningiomas. There are two well-characterized isoforms of OGA (short and full-length), which appear to arise from alternative splicing.
Giant viruses such as the algae-targeting chlorella virus and members of the amoeba-targeting Mimiviridae family have genomes large enough that they can express their own glycosylation machineries. On a smaller scale, specific viruses express glycosyltransferases as virulence factors.
Although the focus of this chapter is on the glycobiology of bacterial cell envelopes, there are several additional (and equally important) facets of bacterial glycobiology. Three of these are briefly mentioned here.
In comparison to N-glycan biosynthesis, relatively little is known of how archaeal O-glycans are assembled. The O-glycans of four archaeal species have been characterized to a limited extent (Figure 22.3). The only published report on archaeal O-glycan biosynthesis revealed that Haloarcula hispanica requires Dol-P-Glc as a sugar donor for the assembly of the N-linked glucose-α-(1,2)-[sulfoquinovosamine-β-(1,6)-]galactose trisaccharide and the O-linked glucose-α-(1,4)-galactose disaccharide.
A. fumigatus is an environmental mold that spreads by airborne particles. It causes serious invasive disease in immunocompromised people that is difficult to treat, leading to high mortality rates.
Apiogalacturonans have only been identified in the walls of duckweeds and seagrasses. The substituted galacturonan referred to as RG-II, which accounts for between 2% and 5% of the primary cell wall, is the most structurally complex polysaccharide yet identified in nature.
In terms of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), chondroitin and heparan sulfate (CS and HS) have been detected in C. elegans, but neither keratan sulfate (KS), dermatan sulfate (DS), nor hyaluronan (Chapter 16); whereas the CS chains contain a low amount of sulfate, the overall structure of HS in C. elegans is similar to the chains elaborated by vertebrates (see Figure 25.5).
This chapter describes glycosylation in the Arthropoda, focusing primarily on Drosophila melanogaster. The major glycan classes are similar to those described in vertebrates, with interesting differences. The powerful genetic systems available for studying gene function in D. melanogaster have proved to be effective means for understanding glycan function in early development and have provided some of the first examples of how glycans affect growth factor signaling, morphogen gradients, protein secretion, and neural function in vivo.
When sea urchin sperm undergo the acrosome reaction, a protein named bindin is released from the acrosomal vesicle. Bindin cements the sperm to a large egg surface glycoprotein named egg bindin receptor 1 (EBR1). Bindin can agglutinate mammalian red blood cells much like plant lectins (Chapter 32), and glycopeptide fragments of unfertilized eggs can block bindin-induced red cell agglutination.
A wide variety of methods for coupling monosaccharides and complex glycans to create affinity resins have been developed. As mentioned above, many sulfated-GAG-binding proteins have been discovered by affinity chromatography using immobilized GAG chains.
Another variation is generally termed a “pull-down assay,” akin to a type of immunoprecipitation. In this approach a solution containing potential ligands is incubated with a GBP that may be immobilized on a surface (e.g., a bead). Afterward the bead-GBP is subjected to several steps (e.g., magnetic separation or centrifugation) to remove the unbound material.
It is important to note that structural methodology is continually evolving, with additional information coming from techniques like small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). Recent advances in cryo-EM provide many exciting opportunities to study protein–glycan interactions, which will also be discussed.
Ricinus communis is native to Africa and India and has been used for millennia, by many cultural groups, for numerous medical and industrial purposes. Two lectins, originally termed RCA-I and RCA-II, can be purified from the seeds.
A common feature of the legume L-type lectins is their monomeric structure. The structures of the monomers consist of three antiparallel β-sandwich: a flat six-stranded “back” sheet, a concave seven-stranded “front” sheet, and a short “top” sheet that keeps the two major sheets together (Figure 32.1A,B). All of these lectins require Ca++ and a transition metal ion (usually Mn++) for their carbohydrate-binding activity.
The original experiments of Neufeld showed that a portion of newly synthesized lysosomal enzymes are secreted into the medium, but may be recaptured by the same cell or by adjacent cells expressing cell-surface CI-MPRs (Figure 33.1). Enzymes that bind to such cell-surface MPRs are endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits and vesicles, eventually reaching the same late endosomal compartments in which newly synthesized molecules arrive from the Golgi.
C-type lectins (CTLs) are Ca++-dependent glycan-binding proteins (GBPs) that share primary and secondary structural homology in their carbohydrate-recognition domains (CRDs). The CRD of CTLs is more generally defined as the CTL domain (CTLD), because not all proteins with this domain bind either glycans or Ca++.
Of all the Siglecs, CD22 has the most conserved specificity for sialylated ligands, binding primarily to α2-6-linked Sias of the type Neu5Ac(or Neu5Gc)α2-6Galβ1-4GlcNAc, which are common capping structures of many complex-type N-glycans. Additional specificity can be conferred by the nature of the Sia moiety as well as sulfation of the underlying glycan. Neither human nor mouse CD22 binds 9-O-acetylated Sias; mouse CD22 has a strong preference for Neu5Gc over Neu5Ac, whereas human CD22 binds both of the latter forms.
Following the discovery of the Ashwell–Morell asialoglycoprotein receptor (AMR) in the liver, many investigators sought other such receptors by affinity chromatography with immobilized asialoglycoproteins. In 1975, a novel lectin of ∼15 kDa was isolated from electric organs of the electric eel, and named “electrolectin.” This noncovalently linked homodimer displayed hemagglutinating activity toward trypsinized rabbit erythrocytes that was inhibitable by β-galactosides; inclusion of β-mercaptoethanol in the isolation buffers was required to maintain the binding activity.
Examination of a high-resolution, three-dimensional structure of FimH bound to mannose revealed that, although mannose exists as a mixture of α and β anomers in solution, only the former was found in the complex. Mannose binds FimH at a deep and negatively charged site of FimH (Figure 37.4). FimH has “catch-bond” properties, such that the binding strength of individual FimH adhesins is augmented by increasing the shear forces on surface-bound E. coli cells.
In contrast to lectins, which tend to fall into evolutionarily conserved families (Chapters 28–37), GAG-binding proteins do not have common folds and instead appear to have evolved by convergent evolution. Several hundred GAG-binding proteins have been discovered, which make up the GAG-interactome and fall into the broad classes presented in Table 38.1.
NGLY1 recognizes only misfolded or denatured glycoproteins. The enzyme is bound to the proteasome by subunits S4 and HR23B as a complex with Cdc48, a component of ERAD complexes. Degradation of the released N-glycan occurs in two stages.
The ER-localized carboxyl terminus of TREX1 has been proposed to interact with, and stabilize, the catalytic activity of the ER oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) complex and thereby suppress immune activation.
In animals with internal fertilization, glycan-dependent recognition events occur during sperm interactions with reproductive tract mucins, in sperm–fallopian tube interactions, in sperm–ova binding within the fallopian tubes, and during implantation of the early embryo. Glycosylation-deficient male mice are sometimes infertile or subfertile. Following birth, mammals produce milk containing an array of glycoproteins and a complex mixture of species-specific milk oligosaccharides (Chapter 14).
Certain strains of E. coli express pili that bind avidly to P-blood group–related glycosphingolipids in the bladder epithelium, leading to urinary tract infection. Pathogenic strains of Salmonella produce pili that facilitate adherence to human intestinal cell mucosa, thereby causing food poisoning and infectious diarrhea. In other cases, a surface-anchored protein (afimbrial adhesin) expressed by the bacteria represents a critical colonization factor (Figure 42.3B).
African trypanosomes (Trypanosoma brucei) transmitted by blood-sucking tsetse flies are the etiologic agents of nagana disease in cattle and sleeping sickness in humans. A remarkable feature of these organisms is their ability to survive extracellularly in the host bloodstream, where they are constantly exposed to the immune system. Evasion of the host immune response depends on “antigenic variation,” a highly evolved survival strategy that relies on structural variance of GPI-anchored glycoproteins (VSGs) on the trypanosome surface (Figure 43.2).
The internal surface of the lysosomal membrane has a thick, degradation-resistant glycocalyx of integral and peripheral membrane proteins decorated with poly-N-acetyllactosamines, which protect the lysosomal membrane against destruction. However, these proteins would also shield incoming membranes from degradation if vesicle fusion simply occurred.
Although the term “congenital disorders” by definition include those caused by nongenetic, unfavorable in utero conditions, the term “congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG)” is now widely used as an equivalent of inherited disorders of glycosylation. Following the discovery of the genetic defect in human I-cell disease in 1980 (Chapter 33) it was anticipated that many more human defects in glycan biosynthesis would be found, but more than a decade went by before the next example was found.
Another alternative is optimized synthetic α-mannosides, which could treat and prevent UTIs. Many pathogens initiate infection by binding to host cell-surface glycans (Chapter 37). Variable expression of these glycans may explain an individual's susceptibility to infection.
Many years ago, cancer patients were reported to express “Hanganutziu–Deicher” antibodies, which were later shown to recognize gangliosides carrying the nonhuman sialic acid N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), which was also found in human tumors. This unusual phenomenon has now been explained by the metabolic incorporation of diet-derived Neu5Gc into human glycans (Chapter 15). This Sia differs from the common human Sia, Neu5Ac, by addition of a single oxygen atom (Figure 47.3).
Mention should also be made about the approaches to isolate novel lectins from natural sources, or even when made recombinantly or in the form of some type of GRP. Historically, such isolation methods have used affinity chromatography. For example, a high density of lactose linked to agarose in the form of an affinity column can be used to isolate galectins, which can be eluted with lactose as a hapten. The cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CD-MPR) was isolated by affinity chromatography on immobilized yeast mannans containing phosphorylated mannose.
Cells in culture mutate at a low rate (<10−6 mutations per locus per generation). In CHO cells, some loci are functionally haploid (single copy), and in HAP1 human cells, essentially all loci are haploid, which means that a single hit may generate a recessive mutant. However, typical mammalian cells are diploid and immortalized cells are often hyperploid, so the frequency of finding recessive mutants is low. To greatly increase the probability of finding desirable mutants, mutations may be induced by treating cells with chemical (e.g., alkylating agents), physical (e.g., ionizing radiation), or biological (e.g., a virus) mutagens or, perhaps more likely, by lentiviral transduction with CRIPSR/Cas9 genome-wide or focused libraries.
Linkage analysis is a well-established and ingenious approach for determining linkage positions. The principle of this method is to introduce a stable substituent (an ether-linked methyl group) onto each free hydroxyl group of the native glycan.
The term genomics arose from the availability of complete genome sequence data as well as computational methods for their analysis. However, <2% of genes in the human genome encode proteins. These genes are transcribed into messenger RNAs (mRNAs) that make up the “transcriptome,” of which ∼30% are assigned to protein coding. The total complement of proteins expressed by the cell is collectively termed the “proteome.” Most eukaryotic proteins are post translationally modified (e.g., by phosphorylation, sulfation, oxidation, ubiquitination, acetylation, methylation, lipidation, or glycosylation).
A critical component of glycoinformatics is the availability of standardized approaches to share data and tools. To address this problem a number of international efforts are underway to establish standards for the presentation of glycomics data to facilitate data comparison, exchange, and verification. The Glycomics Ontology (GlycO) was the first ontology developed to provide standard terminologies for representing experimentally verified glycan structures as collections of chemically and contextually defined constituents, facilitating the association of these structural elements with biosynthetic and functional processes.
Pure glycans of defined structure are essential research tools in glycobiology. Unlike proteins and nucleic acids, which can be obtained in homogeneous forms by recombinant expression and polymerase chain reaction (PCR), respectively, glycans produced in biological systems are heterogeneous. Furthermore, the quantities that can be obtained from biological systems are often small. Chemical synthesis can be used to obtain homogeneous glycans in larger quantities than are available from most cellular production systems. Chemical synthesis can be further employed to incorporate glycans into homogeneous glycoproteins. This chapter summarizes the current state of the art in chemical methods to produce glycans.
A demonstration of an endo-hexosaminidase-derived glycosynthase in action is given by the synthesis of Man9GlcNAc2-glycopeptide 28 from a glycoprotein from HIV-1. The sequence of steps commences with homogeneous Man9GlcNAc2Asn 24 that can be prepared by exhaustive proteolytic digestion of soybean glycoproteins by pronase.
Crystal structures for other sialidases have allowed the design of species-specific analogs. This rational approach to inhibitor design holds great potential, not only for neuraminidase inhibitors, but also, as described above, for O-GlcNAcase and OGT inhibitors. These examples illustrate how structure can guide design of carbohydrate-based inhibitors as well as heterocyclic inhibitors that have been more commonly advanced as drugs.
Another type of N-glycosylation found in γ-proteobacteria involves a cytosolic N-glycosyltransferase (NGT) that targets the N-X-S/T acceptor sequence motif recognized by mammalian OST (Chapter 9). NGT transfers a single monosaccharide (e.g., Glc) from an activated sugar nucleotide donor, with loose donor substrate specificity that includes both UDP and GDP sugar nucleotides. This provides an entirely new approach to engineering alternate types of N-glycosylation.
The challenge for enzyme replacement therapy is to get the enzymes targeted properly to lysosomes, where they can degrade accumulated substrate. Enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher's disease targets the lysosomes of macrophages via the cell-surface mannose receptor (see Chapter 31). The four recombinant enzyme products imiglucerase (approved in 1995), velaglucerase (approved in 2010), taliglucerase alfa (Elelyso, approved in 2012), and eliglustat (Cerdelga, approved in 2014) are marketed to treat Gaucher's disease.
The elucidation of molecular mechanisms requires tools that mimic the presentation of glycans on the cell surface. Individual protein–carbohydrate interactions are often of low affinity and broad specificity, complicating the description of glycan function. Nature enhances specificity by utilizing multivalent interactions.
Synthetic or naturally derived oligosaccharides can also be covalently appended to polymer chains built from petroleum-based monomers. This gives rise to glycopolymers with architectures resembling those of glycoproteins or proteoglycans.
A strong basic knowledge base regarding the genomics, chemistry, biochemistry, biosynthesis, and biological roles of these ubiquitous and diverse molecules is now well-established (Chapters 2–19). The broad outlines of their natural occurrence and evolution (Chapters 20–27) and their recognition by glycan-binding proteins (Chapters 28–38) are becoming clear, as is their important role in normal and abnormal physiology and disease (Chapters 39–47). Facile methods for their analysis, manipulation, and synthesis of glycans have also been established (Chapters 48–56), and their significance in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries, nanotechnology, and bioenergy and materials science is obvious (Chapters 57–59).
